title: SICP Exercise 1.14
slug: sicp-exercise-1-14

You can find a counting coin tree elsewhere. Its form depends on the
number of kinds of coins $n$, the amount of money $a$
and denominations $m_1,...,m_n$. The code for recursive
process is in the SICP book and you can have a look at the iterative process
here: [counting change]({filename}counting.change.md). The
behavior of recursive and iterative algorithms is practically identical.
In simple terms, both processes try to build a sum $\sum_{i=1}^n k_{i}m_i$
by incrementing indices $k_i$
starting from zero values. The iterative algorithm does this in order
(with four loops), and the recursive one builds a search tree,
that corresponds to five loops in iterative algorithm.
When the sum equals to the amount, this is a
way of money change. As this sum becomes larger than the amount, this is
wrong way, and both processes do not try to increase the sum further and try a
different combination of index values. Now let's see how the number of
all tries depends on the amount $a$. I will ignore the issues of
rounding to integer values, they are irrelevant for final results. The
range of index $k_1$ is $a/m_1$, and it is
proportional to $a$. The range of index $k_2$ is
$(a-k_1 m_1)/m_2$, and it is proportional to $a$ too.
The number of pairs $(k_1,k_2)$
grows as $a^2$. When we add next index, $k_3$, its
range is $(a-k_1 m_1-k_2 m_2)/m_3$ and the number of tuples
$(k_1,k_2,k_3)$ is proportional to $a^3$, etc. We
conclude that $\textrm{time}\sim O(a^n)$. The ranges of all
indices $k_i$ grow proportionally to $a$, so
$\textrm{space}\sim O(a)$. Weiqun Zhang and other people (see comments
there) got the same results. For the iterative algorithm , the number of
loops is $n-1$, and $\textrm{time}\sim O(a^{n-1})$.
